
## For this website, I really wanted to teach young adults and teens like me how the world of finance works. Many young adults don't receive basic education on their finances, and are faced with tough situations later on in life.

**Note: I am not a financial advisor**, all the content in this book is made by me through my own self research. This book is written by a teen and intended to introduce and educate young teens to ***basic*** money management, and alternative ways to think of finance. Do your own due diligence when dealing with important financial decisions.

---

### What is money?

When most people think of money, they think of cash; a physical representation of one's wealth. Thinking of money like cash is not right, as cash is what would be considered *fluid money*. Fluid money is money which is in your possession (either physically through cash or other means of money storage such as a debit card). Fluid money is important to our daily lives, as most of our financial transactions are either using fluid money or credit money (more on that later). 

However, just because fluid money is the most prevalent, does not mean it is the best kind of money for all purposes.

Usually, when fluid money lacks, people will use something called a *credit card*. My explanation will be very simplified, and you should definitely seek further education of credit cards from your elders or online where there will be more detail. A credit card is issued by banks as a means of crediting money to the card holder (hence the name, credit card). Crediting is when you lend money to, in this case, the card holder. Credit cards have a limit, this limit will decides how much money the bank is willing to lend to the card holder. Since banks are businesses and lending money isn't something they do to be nice, some banks will setup conditions on the card holder. For example, some banks will put an interest on credited money, some will offer a time where owed money isn't counted for interest (more on interest later). Seems simple right? Well it gets more complicated from here. Banks calculate the card holders crediting and spending habits and 'grade' it. The grade is called your credit score.

**Credit Score**

A credit score is **very** important. It is how the bank decides the card holders credit limit, what loans they can get, what their interest is, and a myriad of other things. Most importantly however, your credit score (note: a lot of info including personal info is also collected and stored) can be accessed when you want to use your credit for certain purchases and services (financing cars and other expensive items, insurance, lenders, and landlords to name a few). Your credit score is held in a large database created by a credit reporting company. Do note that when a merchant  or service accesses your credit score through their system, it is all recorded. Without going to much into detail, your credit score is a highly specific and calculated score of your financial powers, spending habits, and much much more info. Your credit score can determine a big aspect of your financial well-being. People with bad credit have a harder time getting housing, cheap insurance, automobiles, expensive items, lenient credit policies, and overall a more directly expensive life. That is why it is important to be conscious about your financial decisions, especially at a young age, as your credit score is built up. Whilst recovering a bad credit score is possible, it once again requires compromises and financial frugality. Basically, you can think of a credit score as an alternative way of measuring wealth numerically to plain dollar-wise wealth. Whilst credit scores are wildly more complicated then what I've just explained, I hope it gives an insight into credit scores and their importance. 

**Interest**

Interest is an interesting topic (bad pun I know). Basically, when the bank lends any amount of money, it is expected to earn money on that lent money (what a mouthful). That is why it charges a percent or more specifically a rate on the money lent. When you hear interest, you probably think of annual percentage rate or APR. APR is used to calculate the rate of interest in a year. A good way to think of interest is the ROI (Return of investment) of the bank's 'investment' towards your purchase. The bank invests money which it expects to be payed back as well as a ROI as interest. Your credit score can influence the interest that you receive, a low credit score receives a high interest, as the bank uses credit scores to analyze risks in their 'investments' and therefore decide to increase their ROI or in your case the interest, in order to combat the risk. 

**Debit and Bank Accounts**

Whilst credit seems convenient, it is not for everyone or for every situation. Some people use debit cards as their primary way of payment. A debit card is essentially a storage bucket connected to a bank account (for most banks). You can deposit your pay check (I will cover checks a little later) to your bank account, this process will take a couple of days or be near instant if you choose to pay for instant processing. Like credit cards, debit cards also have spending limits set by the bank. For large purchases, you wouldn't use a debit card however as the limits wouldn't allow you to. You would instead withdraw from your bank account using a check or other ways of transporting large sums of fluid money. It is important to note the type of bank account allowing you to withdraw and deposit money freely (mostly freely, there are still limitations) are called checking accounts.  The debit card is linked to a checking account. There are also accounts called saving accounts which are a lot more limited than checking accounts regarding withdrawals and deposits. You can not link debit cards to savings accounts. Why use savings accounts? The money that you store in a savings accounts earns **you** interest (obviously decided by the bank). Therefore, savings accounts would not be considered fluid money but rather long-term money. Most people store their life savings into savings accounts, as they earn interest on it, and it is usually a large amount of their money stored into a savings account. 

**Checks**

Checks are money transports, if you want to pay someone these days, you would use Venmo, or Cash App, or PayPal. These are also considered money transports although the companies offer other services as well. These companies and services are new however, and therefore we needed another way to transport money. That is what checks are for, they are written documents with fields that specify the recipient of the check, the reason for the receival of the check, the amount in numeric and in language, as well as a signature to authenticate the sender's approval of the transaction. Checks are either given to the recipient in person or through mail, where the recipient can take the check and deposit it into their own bank account. Checks are non-proprietary to bank. There is an additional step to using checks internationally, and mostly depends on the country laws. 

Checks are not the only way to transfer money. Wire transfers are electronic money transfers made by banks or agencies. Wire transfers are preferred when dealing with international money transfers. There are companies which also offer international money transfer as a service.

**Currencies**

I am mostly taking about currencies because of three things: how international money works, the rise of cryptos, and inflation. I wont be explaining cryptos because they are fairly new and the technology behind them is still misunderstood by many professionals in the financial field. You can think of cryptos as just regular currencies which are backed by technology instead of a nation's treasury. Currencies are representation of wealth set by nations and their treasuries. Before we talk about inflation, we need to talk about how currencies are valuated. Excluding cryptos, a currency's value is backed by the host country's economy. Not to get too political, but *there are ways to enforce a currency's value besides having a strong economy*.

**Inflation**

Inflation is when the currency's value rapidly drops usually due to the physical printing of cash (think of cutting a pizza, the more you cut, the smaller each piece, same with money). Now most explanations of inflation will stop there, but in reality inflation is much more complicated issue then just printing money, however since I don't consider myself a financial expert, I won't be talking about the many causes of inflation. Hyperinflation is when the local currency is so inflated that common street cash is rendered worthless. An extreme example happened in Zimbabwe, where the country quickly switched to electronic currency, as a piece of bread could cost trillions of Zimbabwe dollars. This resulted in ridiculous bills being printed containing trillions. Hyperinflation can cause mass economic effects which are hard to recover from especially at very local levels. Inflation is much more complicated and its causes and effects are very big, more than I can explain here, but I hope you learned something about inflation and how currencies work.

**Assets**

Assets are materialistic (can be in other forms as well, will be touched on later) resources which are considered to have a value in cash. For example, your house is a valued maternalistic object, where it's value is decided upon factors such as the land lot size, house type, house quality, location, state, age, etc. A very popular example is a car. As assets, most cars lose their values very quickly especially if they are a certain brand. Cars lose and gain value as any assets do, based on a multitude of factors. That is why you'll often hear that cars are expensive. Whilst you might've perceived that phrase through the purchase value of said car, usually cars are labelled expensive is because they deprecate over time, so no matter how much you spent on a car, you will likely lose a large portion of it in value as opposed to a house which might gain or lose value like any asset, but is far more stable and likely to gain in value. 

**Networth**

By far my favorite topic to talk about in finance, I see this word tossed around everywhere in articles, online discussions, social media, etc. You may have heard the richest person in the world is Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon (as of writing this piece, it is actually Elon Musk, founder of SpaceX and CEO of Tesla who holds this title). Whilst yes, technically he is richest person on earth based on networth, it is not the type of rich that most people think of. Networth is a calculation of a person's financial worth through their assets, cash, and other factors such as a 401K (pension plan in U.S.). Most of Jeff's networth comes from his 10% ownership of Amazon stock. So no, Jeff Bezos can't give every person millions of dollars and still be a billionaire. We will talk about stocks later, for now just now that stocks are also calculated into networth. Jeff Bezos can choose to sell his shares in exchange of the dollar worth of the stock he is selling. As a majority shareholder and CEO, Jeff is required to make a plan to sell or buy stocks in his company. What Jeff can not do is sell all his stock, as the company would immediately get devalued and possibly bankrupt if such a significant amount of shares were sold. While Jeff does have a tremendously high networth, the amount of money he can spend at once is very miniscule compared to his networth. TL;DR: No one has the power to spend billions at once in their choosing (unless they're a dictator of  a post-communist state) and the logistics behind money get ever so complicated as it's scales up. What you need to know is that if networth was a true representation of wealth, I'd be a pretty rich fellow at 14.

### Stocks

*Note: read this with a tone of sarcasm*, *I wanted to make it a little more entertaining so you continued reading and I could win this competition ;)*

Ah the stock market, did you know that stocks inspired this website? Following the GameStop or GameStonk drama over January and February, it was amazing how much misinformation was being spread by the media and clueless people online. Now I don't claim to be a stock market expert by any means, give me $5k to invest in stocks and you'll never see it again, neither will I. I just like the stock.

**What is a stock?**

This explanation also glosses over how a business works, but in simple terms, so keep that in mind. Lets put it this way, you want to make a business and you decide to set up a lemonade stand. You start out with half-fresh lemons and tap water. Eventually, you garner enough money through your side gigs and enough brains to upgrade your business into something more than a crappy lemonade stand. You start gaining customers and you get to raise your price. Great! It's a business (*oversimplifying massively here*). Since you're a greedy lad, you decide you want to make the next multi-billion dollar enterprise which milks the populations it's serving and totally cares about  human rights. So you turn to your suspiciously rich uncle but he's too busy slaying noobs on WoW (*the uncle is supposed to be a private investor that 'incubates' your company, although keep in mind there is a difference between an incubator like YCombinator and a private investor*) so he denies your request for additional funding. So saddened by your entrepreneurial failure, you need to find a different source of funding.  So you turn to the public, to the common Joe on the street. This is essentially how a company goes public. An IPO or initial public offering. Your IPO is basically the value of your company which is valuated by an investment bank (usually). The valuation is based off your company's financial documents and such. This IPO is basically what the stock market values your company to be at launch, hence the name. Back to the lemonade example, your company has now been listed in a stock exchange (where you buy and sell stocks and get scammed by a hedgefund). There are two types of investors: retail investors and intuitional investors. Retail investors (the modern ones) are the common Joe whom most of usually download an app made by a young boy in Bulgaria. You know the people who made memes and somehow got those memes on shown on TV and congress hearings. Then there is the traditional institutional investor. These investors are not individuals but rather companies and firms which make money off the stock market (and potentially manipulate it too....) Back again to the lemonade example, both of these investors have bought 'shares' of your company. You can think of shares as parts of ownership. Essentially, these investors have 'bought' parts of your company valued upon the IPO. Since you're literally selling portions of your company, you choose what portion you want to sell. Obviously there is a bit more complication involved here, but basically if you decide to sell 80% of your company, the rest of the shares will remain yours and any other person who owned a share previously. 

*One quick note: A security is a synonym for stock*

As stocks deal with billions of money, and make up a humongous proportion of the economy, the public market is highly regulated by a government branch called the SEC (Securities and Exchange Commission). I won't be going to much into details on the SEC as it is a big topic especially concerning the recent GameStop situation as well as the 2008 market crash. 

I think of stocks as heavily calculated gambling. Investors make choices based on their calculations of a how a company might do financially, and decide whether it would be a financially viable option to invest into that company. If you want to get into trading and stocks, it is heavily advised to take some statistic courses as well as to know how the stock market works entirely.

Now where were we, oh yes lemonade. Your lemonade company does really well and your stock flies to the moon. You've done it, you've made a profiteering machine. Since you're tired of dealing with lemonade shenanigans, you want to retire with your sour riches (pun intended). Since you still own a significant share, you decide to sell it off..... SEC OPEN UP! Here's where stuff gets interesting, a CEO or a board member (board members are usually significant share holders) does not get to freely sell and buy shares of their own company. You might already know why this is the case as it would be a bad idea to let someone with so much control and data to freely buy and sell shares. This is called insider trading.  Now a CEO is allowed to trade their shares, but only using publicly available information. Otherwise, it would be consider insider trading. How does the SEC regulate insider trading? To put it simply, the SEC has the tools and the knowledge to detect whether an inside trade happened, as the CEO of a company, you hold much more power in the market (in the context of your company) than anyone else and your actions have consequences. 

**Options**

I'd love to explain option trading as well, the reason I don't is because it would not fit the theme of this website and I don't feel like I have the knowledge myself to simplify  and explain option trading. I will however provide a brief explanation. An option is basically the **ability** to buy (called calls) or sell (called puts) a stock at a specified date, but not an obligation. The price at which the stock may be bought or sold at a specified date is called a strike price.

Overall, this is a very basic outlook on the stock market. I would hope you, the reader, will do a little more research on your own about the stock market.

As the old saying goes:

> W*hen life gives you lemons, make lemonade*

(And yes I did write this whole entire explanation using a lemonade stand example just for this quote)

### The End

I will definitely update this book as my own knowledge of finance grows and as my front end skills grow a bit more, make it look more like a book. I hope this short little book made you laugh, inspired you to learn a bit more about stocks, and taught you things that you might have not known before. Farewell, it has been a journey my friends.